Welcome back, so we're going to talk about
animation sub-state machines. So this part
is sufficiently complex that I'm going to
take the unusual step of overviewing the pinsetter,
which is the device that resets and clears
the pins and our end goal in a prototype,
and then we will set up a swiper bar to tidy
and reset the pins, add a swipe animation
etc. and talk about animation state machines,
and manage it all in code. So, quite a lot
to do and we may end up breaking this into
more than one video.
So the first thing that I'm going to do is
I'm going to take you to a prototype. This
is the prototype that I built before teaching
this section and this is going to give you
an idea of the end result that we are heading
towards. So, we have something called a swiper,
it's this thing here. It's a piece of glass
in my case and let's just see what happens
with this swiper, so if we click play here
and just go back to the scene view and look
down at the sharp end of the game down by
the pins and swiper, we have a state machine
- an animation state machine that's sitting
in an idle state at the moment and it has
two of these funny things that you can create
by right clicking and saying create sub-state
machine for reset and tidy.
So let's look at the difference. What is a
reset? Well a reset is where the swiper goes
down, swipes all the pins out of the way,
comes back again, i.e. renewing the pins,
and then goes back to idle. So let's look
at that substate machine again, so let's just
pause, you come into this state, this reset
state, you swipe, down here and back; you
renew the pins which is just a single bang
- here - here's a new set of pins and then
you lower those pins back down to the ground.
Right? So you swipe, renew lower, let's watch
it again.
So, in the scene view, trigger the reset,
swipe happening now, all the pins get swiped
out of the way, renew i.e. instantiate new
pins and then drop them down real quick. OK
so that is a reset, and we use a sub state
machine just to keep the animation hierarchy
tidy, it sits there in idle just in case we
trigger a reset. Perfect so what's a tidy,
let's look at a tidy first, click that, all
the pins are lifted up, whatever's left i.e.
the pins that have fallen over are swiped
and then they're put back down again. So let's
look at the sub-state machine.
So we come in, we raise the pins, we lower
the pins again and then we leave. OK so let's
look at that again. When the trigger happens
we raise the pins that haven't fallen over,
we swipe the ones that have fallen over and
we lower the pins back down, OK? So you can
see how the end result of what we're looking
is pretty neat; it's pretty cool that we can
have these submachines and they automatically
reset to idle when they finish resetting or
tidying and we are defining what it actually
means to reset the pins or tidy the pins - by
the way you can drag around these states all
you like so that you can see them better.
Like that, that's fine.
So you are making the definition of what it
means to reset or tidy inside the animator.
The other thing you should know is how do
these work? How does the raise work? Well
let's take a look, raise for a start is just
after point three of a second it just calls
a method called lift pins. How does swipe
work? Well, swipe here is an actual animation
and it has a curve and it has key frames.
Mostly the key frames that you've been looking
at so literally that's where the swiper moves
through the game space. If we click play and
you look in the scene view that's what actually
moves this guy.
So we have key frames for the swiping, lowering
again is just a call to a method to lower
the pins and very similarly for the reset
it's the same type of ideas. In fact we re-used
the concepts of raising the pins, lowering
the pins, it's only renewing the pins that's
different for the reset and again that's just
a method call. Now you can for this approach
of course use animations for lowering and
raising, we just drop the pins when we lower
them but you're very welcome to include an
animation, you've got the facility to do that.
So I quite like this structure, I quite like
the idea that the animator is responsible
for this. There are some risks, one of the
risks is that we trigger something and that
the animator never returns control flow back
to the game because if for any reason one
of these things doesn't get called or we get
stuck in an animation state it's slightly
risky leaving the core execution flow going
through the animator but I'm showing you lots
of different ways of doing things and this
is a perfectly valid approach to go into a
tidy state through there and automatically
exits through a base layer.
So let's just watch it in progress once again
and then you are going to be responsible for
making it happen; but there is a, what is
this a reset happening now. There it is and
then a tidy is slightly different. We're re-using
everything, we only have one renew one lower
one raise one swipe animation. So it's pretty
neat, it's kind of organised quite nicely.
Cool so you've got the overview of what we
are trying to do here. Now we need to go back
to our project as we've left it which is our
BowlMaster project and make our project do
this, so bear with me while it loads.
So where are we? What's the gap between what
we've just seen and where we are? Well we
don't even have a swiper. So let's go ahead
and make a swiper object to start with. So
this is just going to be a piece of something
that looks like glass but we'll worry about
the visuals later, down towards the end of
the scene so go ahead and make yourself a
cube - a 3D cube-like object that sits just
above the pins as a swiper. Pause the video
and do that micro-challenge right now.
OK so the way that I'm going to do it is I'm
going to go 3D object / cube like that and
then I'm just going to scale it. Now the scale
in x is going to be 105 because that's the
width of the lane; y what 20cm high something
like that and then how deep? What, 5cm? 10cm?
If in doubt make it thick because it's going
to make sure that it collides because at high
speed sometimes things don't collide so I'm
going to make mine 10cm thick and 40 or 30cm
high, let's say 30, those proportions look
OK.
So there it is. Later on, or if you want to
now you can put some materials on here that
make it look more like glass but for now that's
fine. Of course you need to position it so
that it's at 0x, right in the middle of the
lane and then we need to make a judgement
call on whether it's at the right height,
I think that I'm going to lift mine up to
I think 80 cm and we may as well have a nice
round z position. Now remember the trick,
you can click on the letter z and drag left
and right and watch how it affects the numbers
so I'm going to make mine at 1750 I think.
OK perfect, so we now have a cube but this
is actually called a swiper so name the object.
So at least we have a swiper in place now.
So the next thing to do is think about how
we're going to set up our animation. Let's
look at our hierarchy, we have a camera and
a main camera and a directional light and
a floor, a load of pins and a ball. Well I
would say that the floor and the swiper are
both part of a more general thing called the
lane, so why don't we create an empty object
and just call it lane?
Now provided that you reset the transform
of that empty game object you can then drag
in the swiper and the floor without any negative
effects, you're just grouping the floor and
the swiper together and saying that they're
all just part of the lane as a whole. They're
not part of the pins, the pins are separate
to the lane, so is the ball, that lot's all
part of the bowling alley or the lane. OK
fine, that's good, now we need to put an animator
on something so that it can move around the
swiper. Now, put the animator on the most
specific thing that you can.
Yes, you could put the animator on the lane,
that would work, and then you could reach
in to the swiper object; but ask yourself
do we have anything else to animate in this
lane? Well there's a design decision there
for you. If for example you had some of those
kids' gutter bars down the side left and right
that could pop up, they could pop up as an
animation so it may make sense to keep things
simple to have a single animator on the lane
and then it would be able to access the swiper,
maybe the gutter bars if we had them, so that
would be fine.
The cost of that is that it would be a little
more cumbersome to use the animator, the other
option is that you put the animator on the
swiper itself and have a dedicated animator
for the swiper so it's entirely up to you
which way you do that. In my case I'm going
to take my own advice and put my animator
on the swiper, the most specific object. So
let's go ahead and do that. There is an animator.
Now the other thing that you're going to need
on this swiper if it's actually going to impact
with the pins is you're going to need yourself
a RigidBody.
It already has a box collider but no physics
collisions will be exhibited unless you have
a RigidBody as well. We certainly don't want
it to be a trigger, it's a lot more than that,
it is a fully physical object but let's add
a RigidBody. A 3D RigidBody these days. We
don't need gravity on that RigidBody and I
personally like to move that up the hierarchy
to sit next to the collider just so that at
a glance I can see that this is a RigidBody
collider, but it is kinematic, we are going
to be specifying the motion through the animator.
Alright so that's the right type of object,
now your challenge is going to be to actually
use the animator to make that type of swipe
animation that you saw ensuring that in doing
so you'll actually swipe the pins out of the
way. So go ahead and do that now, create a
swipe animation. Be careful not to hit any
raised pins on your way down or back, you'll
need enough key frames to kind of go around
the bend; and then go out and back smoothly.
So pause the video and make an animation similar
to what you saw in my prototype right now,
and I'll see you when you're ready.
OK cool welcome back so this is how I'm going
to add the swipe animation, let's go to the
swiper and let's get ourselves in an animation
layout. Now have you saved an animation layout?
Not since I upgraded to Unity 5. So I'm going
to get the windows that I need, I want an
animation window and I like to have that up
here and then I want another window which
is the animator and that animator which gives
me all of my animation states I like to have
down the bottom here and then that layout
I'm going to save as animation. Entirely up
to you how you workflow this but now I can
quickly switch to this animation layout in
future and that just went because of Unity
5.
Cool, so our swiper has an animator on it.
But is has no animation controller so let's
start getting ourselves a little tidier. Create
a folder called animations - if you like,
you can organise this how you like - and create
yourself a new animation controller. I'm going
to call it swiper, because that's what's being
animated, and you can drag it onto the swiper
like that. Now, the system is intelligent
enough to know that you want the animation
controller here, that you just created, to
go into the animator of the swiper, so that's
cool. Now, if you clicked on the animator
then we have this empty state machine view
here, you can use the middle mouse button
or the mouse wheel to drag around this thing.
We have no animation clips right now, or states.
So let's create ourselves an empty state called
idle. So we'll organise our animations into
sub-state machines and stuff later in a future
video, for now let's just focus on getting
this swipe animation working properly so you
can create a new empty state here, call it
swipe, it can be moved into a lower level
later. It doesn't have a motion, so let's
make a motion. Create / animation and just
call it swipe. So back at your animator swipe
can now be given a swipe motion, perfect;
and then we need a way of getting into swipe.
Well I'm just going to make the transition
happen by default, so if you click play it
goes idle and then swipe. Alright? That's
absolutely fine for testing purposes. Remember
we're going to reorganise this state machine
later. The focus of this video is to get the
swipe animation working properly. So you need
to be clicked on the swiper and now you need
the clip swipe, and this is where we actually
model the animation. So if you click record
here, remember that you can just switch between
the animation and the scene to apply your
key frames.
So at the start we need a key frame which
is where the swiper is where it is - right
at the top there, that's fine. So maybe after
one second we add a key frame, but a key frame
what? It's all very well to just add a key
frame but you need to be changing a particular
property and that property is the position
of the swiper. So at the start, there, when
you look at the scene the swiper's here. Now
at, say, one second, we go over to the scene
and we move it to where we want it. We want
it to be down a bit and forward a bit. Now
bear in mind it will smooth the corners of
these motions.
So if we play that at the moment... to there,
that's OK. So now you just have to go in and
put the rest of your key frames in. So maybe
I'm going to spend another two seconds getting
myself to the back. So what do I mean by the
back? I want to get to this kind of position,
something like this at the back here right.
Low enough to make sure that we swipe everything,
great, and then maybe two seconds later over
here somewhere we add a new keyframe and maybe
we want to be back at the start by then.
Or near the start, back here perhaps; and
then maybe we need a final keyframe maybe
a second later giving us a 6 second total
animation that is back right at the beginning.
But if you leave that keyframe off to start
with never have overlapping keyframes because
there's a risk that you'll have glitching
then. So let's just see how that works if
you don't have that final keyframe in. It
goes along, it swipes them out of the way,
it doesn't move far enough back and it doesn't
return to the start position so we are going
to need a keyframe to return to the start
position but it's always worth checking that.
So, copy those keyframes of the start position
to be safe, and then paste them where you
want them so that you know that they're in
the right position. Also the end position
which I believe is here simply isn't far enough
back to swipe them off the back of the lane.
There you go, let's take a look at this animation
now. Again all of this can be improved later
but look, that's pretty cool, it swipes them
off the back, it's going through the floor.
Why is it going through the floor? Let's just
take a look at that.
So key frames tell you most of the story but
they don't tell you the entire story. What
helps is to go to curves and what curves is
going to do is to tell you how the system
is interpolating between these points and
the problem is here and here where the swiper
is going too low. So how are we going to deal
with that? Well you could just play with your
curves here and make sure that your swiper
doesn't go through the floor and also doesn't
clip the pins. You see what I'm doing? So
that's curves there, so the dope sheet is
what are the positions and when but the curves
is additional information. In addition to
that, OK?
So and you've got two different curves here,
what are they for? They're for the x position
and the y position and the z position of the
swiper. So its x position doesn't want to
change, its y position, up and down, does
want to change in a fairly smooth curve like
that and at the same time that that's happening
the z position wants to change backwards and
forwards. Pretty cool, eh? and you can see
them all together like this, although there's
a scaling issue because it moves a lot further
in z than it does in x.
Let's just take a look and see how that adjustment
to the curves has worked - down, swipes the
pins, doesn't go through the floor and smoothly
comes back. How cool is that? We may need
to adjust it later but for the moment we have
achieved what we want to achieve for this
video which is creating our swiper animation.
So I look forward to seeing yours, you can
make your movement a load more funky you can
make this guy spin and dance and do whatever
you like but the point is we have an animation
ready for future work so congratulations and
I'll see you soon.